Microsoft just gave Vibe engineers a
huge win out of nowhere. Minutes ago,
they open sourced the tool that
originally started the AI coding bubble,
a GitHub co-pilot. As of today, it's
officially free and open- source
software under the MIT license, meaning
you can fork it, modify it, and even
build your own billion-dollar competitor
without going to prison. And on top of
that, they also open source the Windows
Subsystem for Linux or WSL. That's a big
deal because for the last year or two,
one of the hottest griffs in Silicon
Valley has been the promise of an AI
powered junior engineer or shovels that
can turn any rando on the street into a
skilled programmer. Startups have raised
millions of dollars by simply forking VS
Code and duct taping some LLMs to it.
Like Cursor is now valued at $9 billion,
while Windsurf was recently acquired by
OpenAI for 3 billion. There are some
good upandcoming open- source
alternatives like the void editor, but
VS Code is on another level and has been
the undisputed king of code editors for
nearly a decade. In today's video, we'll
find out why Microsoft would just give
you the code to its extremely valuable
co-pilot. It is May 20th, 2025, and
you're watching the code report. The
timing for this announcement is
interesting to say the least because
OpenAI and Microsoft used to be rockolid
partners. They used to have an exclusive
deal to train their models on Azure, but
Microsoft recently ended that deal. Then
just a few days ago, OpenAI announced
Codeex, which is a cloud-based coding
agent that can generate an ungodly
amount of bugs in parallel, but it's a
product very similar to GitHub agent
mode, which was just announced a few
months ago. Then yesterday at Microsoft
Build, they announced how it's being
integrated directly into GitHub, while
also adding support for the model
context protocol to all their products,
including Windows 11, paving the way to
give artificial intelligence full
control over your operating system.
That's a huge opportunity for developers
and hackers alike. And it's essential
for any company that wants to win the AI
race to win the hearts and minds of
developers. Because according to
Anthropic's recent study, the vast
majority of people who use and pay for
LLMs, unironically, are programmers.
OpenAI has been lagging behind with
programmers recently. But to change
that, they recently locked in a massive
deal by acquiring Windsor for $3
billion, which again is a VS Code fork
modified to be an AI slopatic. The
timing is really funny because had they
just waited a few days, they could have
saved those $3 billion and just used the
now open- source co-pilot. But I don't
think Microsoft open source copilot just
to pone Sam Oldman. Virtually every open
source play made by Microsoft has worked
out really well. VS Code and TypeScript
dominate the webdev ecosystem. The
Windows subsystem for Linux made Windows
a viable platform for all developers and
they even open sourced their old MS DOS
code last year. But this is a bit
unusual because Copilot is a paid
product costing as much as $390 per
year. And you might be wondering, does
that mean it'll be totally free now? And
the answer is no. No, it does not. When
you pay for Copilot, you're mostly
paying for the cloud computing cost to
generate your actual code, not the
underlying software of Copilot itself.
In theory, by open sourcing it, Copilot
should improve and ship features faster
without the need to pay Microsoft
employees. You may have heard that
Microsoft just laid off 6,000 people,
including many veteran engineers. So,
they could really use the extra help,
but it's a win-win for everybody because
you could use their code to monetize
your own thing or extend it in ways that
help other developers, and that's just
not possible on closed source platforms
like Cursor and Windsurf. Not to
mention, you get better transparency and
quicker fixes for security
vulnerabilities. I'd say this is a big
win for Microsoft, and there will be big
rewards for those who can actually code
while leveraging AI to become 10x more
productive. But, you have 80,000 hours
in your career, 40 hours a week, 50
weeks a year for 40 years. That's a lot
of time to make a positive impact on the
world. And 80,000 hours, the sponsor of
today's video, can help you do that. If
you're young, you've probably heard
advice like, "Follow your passion, do
what you love, and take the initiative."
But these cliches are not based on
evidence or data. Unlike the work of
80,000 Hours, which is a nonprofit that
for the last 10 years has been
researching the question of how do you
find a fulfilling career that does good,
too? Their website, which is entirely
free, has tons of collected research on
high impact careers along with job
boards, podcasts, and a lot more. It's
an incredible resource for anyone
looking to start a high impact career or
make a switch mid-career. Join the
newsletter today to get a free copy of
their in-depth career guide sent to your
inbox. And remember, it's totally free
because it's a nonprofit and could be
the catalyst that changes your direction
in life. This has been the Code Report.
Thanks for watching and I will see you
in the next